Good afternoon and welcome to the Social Services and Select Committee.
So we have the Ministry for Pacific Peoples this afternoon to
give us some information regarding that Long-term Insights briefing.
And I think we have Jordane and Bernadette here with us.
We've got a 45-minute hearing. Time is yours.
If you want to leave some time towards the end for questions, please feel welcome
to do so.
Fa'afetai lava, and thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today. Firstly, if I can
just introduce Bernadette Scanlon, our Deputy
Secretary of Policy and Insights, who will be responding with me
today. And if you just bear with me, I just have some opening
comments,
which will take about 10 minutes. So can I just begin by
acknowledging the enduring kinship ties that bind Maori and
Pacific Peoples in this nation. These are not new
connections formed by migration alone.
They are ancient relationships shaped by
navigation, shared cosmologies,
and here in New Zealand, as early as the 1920s and
1930s, by the long-standing role of iwi
in welcoming and hosting and looking after Pacific
families as they made their homes on these shores and within
the boundaries of various iwi around the
country.
There is no other country in the world that can claim this
strong kinship link with Pacific nations.
Through the development of this briefing, we heard many stories of
iwi exercising their stewardship role, extending
their resources, their manaakitanga, and their services
to ensure Pacific peoples and families were cared
for. These stories matter because they remind us that
Pacific settlement in New Zealand has always been relational,
grounded in whakapapa, place, and mutual
responsibility.
Over generations, these relationships have deepened
into marriages, shared communities, shared churches,
shared schools, shared struggles, and increasingly,
shared opportunities have produced a growing
cohort of people who claim rightly and proudly kinship
ties to both Maori and Pacific worlds.
This is not a marginal phenomenon.
It's a distinctive and consequential demographic shift
underway in New Zealand. The Long-term Insights
briefing deliberately places a ring around this
population, not because they are separate, but because
ethnic classification can render them statistically
invisible, even as their influence becomes increasingly
visible in our communities, our classrooms, and our
workplaces. If we want good long-term policy,
we need to be honest about who's coming through the gate.
And what the data is telling us is striking.
The average age of people who identify with both Maori and
Pacific whakapapa is only 15 years of
age. It compares with Maori at 26 years of
age and Pasifika at 24 years of
age, and then non-Maori and non-Pacific,
38 years of age. So the Maori Pacific
demographic is half the age of the
non-Maori, non-Pacific population.
In demographic terms, this is not simply a young
population, it's a very young population.
Many are children now, and nearly all are New Zealand's
future workforce.
We shouldn't be surprised that they are predominantly based in our
major urban areas, Auckland most prominently,
but also Wellington, Christchurch, and Dunedin, while at
the same time establishing growing footprints in
rural and regional areas such as Northland,
Waikato, South Canterbury, Otago, and
Invercargill.
This combination matters. It positions this
cohort at the intersection of both our urban
productivity engines and our regional revitalization
efforts.
So what does this mean for New Zealand's future productivity and
contribution to the workforce? Firstly, quite simply,
they will be essential. As our broader population ages,
labor force growth will increasingly depend on Maori and Pacific
Peoples, and particularly on those with dual
whakapapa who are coming of age in significant numbers.
This group will shoulder a growing share of workforce
participation, the tax base, the care economy,
and the creative industries. The question is not whether they will
contribute, but whether our systems will be ready to support them to
contribute at their full potential.
Secondly,
this cohort brings unique strengths that are highly aligned with the future
of work.Many are inherently bicultural or multicultural
navigators. They are accustomed to operating across
worlds, to our Māori and Pacific worlds, home and
institution, whenua and city.
In a labor market increasingly shaped by collaboration,
relational skills, adaptability, and
cross-cultural competence, these capabilities are not
nice to have. They are productivity assets.
But, and this is where the briefing is deliberately honest,
there are also future challenges if we get this wrong.
We are already seeing persistent disparities in educational attainment,
housing security, health outcomes, and exposure to the justice
system for Māori and Pacific peoples.
If policy settings fail to recognize the compound realities of
young people with dual identity, we risk
reproducing those inequities into the next generation
at considerable social and fiscal cost.
There is also a classification challenge.
When people are required to choose a single ethnicity,
the lived experience of people can be flattened, and the policy
responses can miss the mark.
Education pathways, employment services, and wellbeing supports
are often designed for one identity or another,
when the reality for many of these young people is often
both and sometimes neither comfortably.
Yet, the opportunities are just as real as the risks.
We can already see amazing glimpses of what this kind of
partnership can look like in practice.
The relationship between the Central Pacific Collective and Ngāti Toa
Rangatira provides a tangible example through the
partnership initiatives such as Our Whare Our fale, where
mana whenua have made available their land for a home ownership
approach focused on the delivery of warm,
healthy, long-term homes. Homes designed for Pacific
people to put down their roots rather than cycle through
insecurity.
These are not homes built in isolation.
They are deliberately located near schools, public transport,
health services, and community supports, recognizing that
stable housing, access to education, and proximity to
care are deeply interconnected. Ngāti Toa
Rangatira's role as mana whenua brings a strong
place-based lens and intergenerational stewardship,
while the Central Pacific Collective contributes deep
Pacific-led insight into whanau needs, affordability
pressures, and cultural patterns of living.
The project also takes an inclusive social value approach to
delivery, strengthening access to employment and business
opportunities, and helping ensure the economic benefits
of development are shared with the communities most
affected by housing need. This approach supports
capabilities, skills, and long-term resilience while
remaining open, transparent, and focused on achieving
the best outcomes for whanau communities and the wider
system.
Together, this approach demonstrates what is possible when iwi leadership
and resources and Pacific community capability are aligned,
creating housing that supports wellbeing, educational
continuity, and workforce participation over the long
term rather than short-term fixes.
For many young people with dual Māori and Pacific whakapapa,
iwi is already part of their lived reality through
whenua, marae, education, faith, and whanau connections.
Creating space for iwi to engage more closely in
conversations about education pathways, employment,
wellbeing, and place-based development offers an opportunity
to ground national policy and local knowledge,
cultural continuity, and intergenerational wisdom.
Just as importantly, this cohort offers New Zealand a chance to
foster greater understanding across our communities.
Younger people who move with confidence between different worlds
have the potential to act in a global sense as
translators and bridge builders, strengthening social
cohesion, challenging false binaries, and modeling a
more relational way of being a global citizen.
Supporting this does not dilute identity.
It deepens it, positioning this briefing not simply
as a reflection on Pacific futures, but as a statement of New
Zealand's future, the workforce we are becoming, and our
readiness to thrive in an increasingly global and
diverse economy. So we offer this briefing to the committee in
that spirit as an invitation to think long, think
relationally, and to work alongside iwi communities
and young people themselves as we lay the foundation for New Zealand's
communities of tomorrow. Thank you so much for listening, and
Bernadette and I welcome questions.
Thank you.
The order. Thank you.
Questions, members.
I might kick off then as sort of comments/questions.
Very interested in your point you made earlier about the connections between
Māori and Pasifika. Actually, I was lucky enough to visit the Atiawa
village, or a Atiawa village about two years ago in
Hawaii.
And a colleague, I mean, Honorable Jenny Salisa
spoke
to the,
uh,
and, um, in her initial comments, and they, they stopped for a reason,
the translation, or the translator went to translate, uh,
I, I... She was either speaking in Tongan or Māori, or both, I can't remember
exactly. But, uh, but they stopped.
They stopped the translator and said, "No, no, we, we understand."
And it was just a, a fascinating, just that connectionSuch a long way
between New Zealand and Taiwan, but it just lead me to
look more closely into the Austronesian-
Mm
... which grows all across the Pacific-
... and the peoples that connects all of us.
And obviously, New Zealand was the last major land mass to be
settled.
Mm.
But it's this Pacific-going peoples that
connected through language and culture-
Mm
... right across the Pacific. So just a comment, and I think an important one for
us to understand in this country and reflect on as we
connect to the blue continent.
Yes. Thank you.
Mm.
Yep.
Willow-Jean.
Kia ora. Thank you for that. I'm particularly
interested in
rangatahi and unemployment.
Is there anything in particular you can talk to around
education, employment, pathways into employment,
to that rangatahi specifically?
Sure.
One of the things that was strikingly obvious to
us is
how
young people
see themselves as part of the solution,
not part of the problem.
And this piece, in particular, was
designed to bring visibility to the
two sides of the coin. Firstly, that there is
a risk if we don't do anything, and secondly, the huge
opportunity that comes with being more
purposeful about how we design the policy.
So, the main thing here is to bring visibility
because they told us directly, "We are not the problems to be
fixed. We are the partners in the solution." So,
this is a commitment we have to the rangatahi.
Mm.
And
in terms of those solutions that they might be
suggesting, do you have any more that you can add to that?
I think it's easy for us to focus
solely on government responsibility, and I'll
come to that.
The thing that I found very interesting
was that when
our rangatahi, if they're enrolled with their iwi, the
iwi collects their data as
rangatahi Maori. So when we met with iwi,
they were like, "Oh, but they're Maori."
Mm.
So
even for iwi to say, "Oh, maybe we now need to collect more
information because we see everyone
as Maori,
and we know that they're Pacific, but they're Maori first here." So, in the
first instance for the iwi that we talked to,
coming to this understanding that the rangatahi have multiple
identities that they may feel a strong affinity
for, is really important.
In terms of the second part, government's responsibility,
if agencies can't see these people-
Mm
... then it's very hard to develop solutions for it.
So, in the first instance, while this is a think piece
to
encourage public conversations about long-term issues,
it is also something that we will
socialize with other agencies so that they understand that
this dynamic does exist and look to make use of those
opportunities.
Ka kite anō.
Thank you.
Christine.
Tena koutou. Tena koutou.
It's a joy to hear
when you talk about dual whakapapa, those things.
It's not a common statement you'll hear in a select
committee.
Mm.
Not when our shoulders are soft. Usually, it's something else
rolling up in a maybe a little bit more of a contentious issue.
But here, to hear it in such a way that
you can see the future coming,
it's there post in the ages, and I noticed when you talk-- And I was a little
bit sort of 12 and 26 and 38, and what that is
setting us up for is it is a very young population.
Mm.
So how do we organize, how do we inspire, how do we
resource and then get out of their way? Those sorts of things.
That's
a heightened interest for me. And
then to that end,
what are you finding or seeing or feeling
from Ngati Toa down this end, and then if you reflect up to Te
Tai Tokerau, so you're talking right up in now where
Willow and I are from,
are you finding the same sorts of things from an iwi or an
hapū type engagement? Are you finding those things are happening
further north?
What we found is people migrate to different areas of the
country for different reasons.
The challenge that we heard from participants
is they say they're too Maori for their Polynesian peers and too Polynesian for
their Maori peers, and it can make them feel left out.
Mm.
So,
I guess the visibility issue-
Mm
... I can't
reinforce how important that is to this cohort.
And it's important for all the reasons that we have
discussed around productivity and contribution to our tax
base when they can thrive
going forward.Thank you.
Lauren.
Thank you.
I'm particularly interested in your insight number two, which is
around the digital landscape.
Mm.
And I just wonder what currently are the
barriers to
the Māori and Pacific-
Mm
... children in getting into that space-
... and developing those skills.
I'm going to
give an opportunity to Bernadette to talk.
But I think in the first instance, it's different depending how old
you are.
Mm.
So for our older generation, often it's a digital
divide, having access to computers, knowing how to use
computers. With our younger generation, their
ability to access some kind of device-
Mm
... is much greater. I'll just see if you ...
Our report findings showed that there is still an access barrier, as well as
capability uplift needed.
There is a difference between being a digital native
to being digital literate.
Literate, mm.
And so just because you have access to cell phones
and you can use it on a daily basis doesn't mean you're going to be able to code in
the future, be able to utilize AI to the optimal stage.
Mm.
So it's about trying to provide the access, provide that capability uplift,
and there is a desire for our Māori Pacific youth to have that.
They want to be self-determinant.
They want to be able to upskill and actually be digitally
literate, which I think is amazing, and we need to foster.
I just thought kids were born with the knowledge .
Yeah.
Yeah, I might supplement, actually, because
we're at a massive inflection point in terms of technology
right now.
We're in it.
And the ability to code isn't necessarily a requirement anymore,
but the ability to give the right prompts to an AI to do the
coding for you is.
But it's also
language and culture can help inform that.
So there's the data sovereignty piece, which is probably increasingly
important, but also challenging because to access these tools which are designed
offshore-
Mm-hmm
... and the resources being built offshore don't naturally take
those things into account. So this is a-- I'm not expecting any
answers that sort of console all these things as everyone's grappling with this
globally. I'm just really interested in what your insights are about how young
people can not just be consumers but prosumers or producers.
Yep
And this incredible inflection point, which everyone's grappling with here
and around the world.
Yeah, of course.
Insight too also talks about the Pacific data sovereignty and Māori data
sovereignty. And a key aspect of that is
doing exactly what you said, taking ownership to develop some of the tools because
if we don't, we're going to have natural biases embedded in
whatever we are adopting in New Zealand.
So making sure that you've got that diversity of thought,
in not just the application but in terms of the actual development
and processing of, and the manufacturing of these products that we're going to be
utilizing is vital to make sure that we are utilizing it best
for our people. And having that diversity in the development
means you remove those biases.
And if I can just add,
from personal experience,
the people developing our policies have huge
wisdom and insight and experience, and unfortunately with
that comes a lot of risk-averseness.
And so, when you're dealing with 15-year-olds,
their ability to find solutions for themselves is,
they call it their superpower.
Mm.
And if I think of my own children, for example, I
saw a message pop up in my
mail, and it's some app to stealth
writing or something like this. So I need to have a
conversation with my son about that because obviously he's
needing to write something and knows that the system will
be better. So how then do we keep
up with our young people and with technology
when we're actually on a different wave
sometimes, and we come with a lot of wisdom and
experience that may prevent us from making the decisions in
time for it to have a policy impact?
And that
age difference is so important for us to be aware
of
as agencies so that we can be mindful of it.
I might ask one more supplement and hand over to Parameeta for another sup.
But just circling back to my first
comment really is, just in this
incredible acceleration of technology
and trying to ensure that these are New Zealand's
focus and our population groups here,
and that data sovereignty is
important but very challenging, one to try with how quickly the technology is
changing. But is there an opportunity and/or is there any
thinking around trying to include the Austronesian
grouping, for want of a better term, across the Asia-Pacific,
who have a lot of similar interests and concerns around exactly the same thing?
The report is silent into that, but no doubt, there's opportunity to
embrace that as well.
We have one initiative at the moment, the Game On initiative.
You might be surprised to know that New Zealand is
almost world leaders in the creation of games in the
gaming industry. And we have
a-Project at the moment that is working with the
gaming industry,
with some NGOs, and with us to
provide internship opportunities for
young people to learn about the opportunities,
because they are so creative. And so when you give them the
opportunity to focus that creativity into
an industry like gaming,
then we think that this is one of the pathways that we can use.
We haven't looked more broadly at the moment, but New
Zealand is great at a lot of
these areas that we don't amplify that
often, how good we are in some of these spaces.
And we have, I think, the single biggest population groups of
Polynesian peoples on the planet, right?
Mm-hmm. Yes.
And so we have a superpower in terms of that connectivity-
Yes
... to the Pacific.
Maree Mitchell.
Yeah. I think the superpower's old too.
It's super old, like you referred to in your opening statement.
So I think it's a
revitalized
energy, really.
But
anyway, so Fiber Fale?
Yes.
Yeah.
So you know that group.
Yes.
And so
when we're trying to really understand more,
in this regard anyway, at this committee, having
people that are right on that line doing
those things, young, vibrant,
and
are planned, and they've got an idea, and they...
I ran into them the other day at the airport.
Well, they were running into me, and bang, they want to tell me.
They're just so full of youthful,
smart,
driven people.
Yes.
These two young, stunning women. So I just
wondered, are they a group or a firm
or organization that you're connected with?
And would you recommend that we bring them in here so they could talk to us about
what they think is a good future going ahead?
If I may, if I just go back to your first point.
One of the beautiful things about dealing with this
particular cohort is how respectful they are
of mātua. So they look at
age with a respectful lens,
and this is a very different
characteristic when dealing with non-Māori, non-Pacific.
So it is about they
embrace wisdom, but they also know
that because they help their parents and their grandparents, that
there's a big gap between what they know.
So I just wanted to acknowledge the deep respect that they have for
whakapapa and kinship.
In terms of Fiber Fale,
they
do wonderful work in our community,
and I've spoken with them a number of times.
And I really want to
support their
desire to have a really strong business offering.
So they do a lot of work in the community, and they
provide access to laptops, and they do AI training.
They also don't want to give away their expertise for free,
and they've been really clear on that.
Good.
Which is absolutely what they should do.
Yeah. Very good.
So we
will continue to navigate that space because, as you are aware, there
are various procurement rules and things like that that we have to navigate with
them.
Sure. Thank you.
Marie Christine, go ahead.
Thank you. Sorry, I might have missed it in your kōrero earlier
and in the report, but of that cohort,
have you identified the tribal affiliations, the iwi
affiliations?
Not all of them. It's been-
But have you kind of got a picture of...
Yes. It's complicated. Far more complicated.
So iwi don't capture all.
Mm.
Although now they're very interested, the iwi that we talk to.
The second is, depending on who the dominant
person is in the household-
Yeah
... some of the-- And it goes back to I'm too Māori for my
Polynesian peers and too Polynesian for my Māori peers.
Mm.
There's a lot of interest in reconnecting those whakapapa
ties.
Mm.
And then there's some that are really clear.
They know who their iwi is, and they proudly
manage both. So it's not a straightforward answer.
And because you did identify where they're sort of concentrated.
Mm.
And of course, I think of being a Ngāpuhi-
Yeah
... and one in five-
Being a Ngāpuhi
... are Ngāpuhi, so I'm assuming there's going to be a lot of them.
Yeah.
If Karnelle Sefulonia's spokesperson was here, she would say she has these mokopuna
-
Mm
... who are both Pasifika and Māori-
... and Ngāpuhi, by the way. But I also think,
I organized a whānau reunion along with my cousin back in
2006, and to our
surprise,
half of the whare was full of Tongan
Māori relations that we didn't actually know
existed until the whānau reunion.
And then you find out ancestor went to Tonga and had five wives,
and there are a whole lot of descendants from that line living
primarily in South Auckland, and first time really making
that connection back to the marae.
Mm.
So yeah, I was interested in if through census, and
if we're losing census,
how do we try and capture this data and those
connections and then
support that-reconnection
to and strengthening when we know identity
security,
that sense of identity can make such a huge
difference. Yeah, so just-
Sure
... wondering. Because it comes through in the report so much.
So I'm like, what are the mechanisms for that?
I'll get Bernadette to talk to the data, but if I can just say that
one of the drivers that we found in doing this work
is that when Pacific people marry outside of a
Pacific culture, they marry a Maori first.
So
that's the dynamic at the moment.
Mm.
It may change in the future. But up until the point
that we did this, Pacific people marrying outside
Pacific will more likely marry a Maori next.
Mm.
So this was
one of the foundational questions when we decided to embark on this work,
is what does this look like? Now we know it's 94,000
people approximately.
And-
Yeah.
And I think one of the key messages from this OTEP is
how invisible this dual population is-
Yeah
... within data-
... within existing research.
Yeah.
And that's primarily because of the mechanisms we are collecting and using data-
Yeah
... in the sense that, whether it be prioritized ethnicity or that
you have to, in your interactions with any government agencies-
Mm
... or their service providers, you have to opt for one ethnicity.
Ethnicity, yeah.
It's diluting-
Mm
... the multi-ethnicity component.
Mm.
So when you start asking about specificities or
sub-ethnicity with tribes or hapū, it's just going to get more and
more diluted from an aggregate view.
It's already-
Yeah
... poorer data.
And we are conscious that,
with moving to a new census, and that's with the existing census, by the way.
Mm.
Moving to a new census base is going to put pressures on still how we collect
ethnicity data. And it's something that we are often
advocating for to ensure that we have good, strong ethnicity data, so that we
can understand identity, but also understand drivers behind need as well.
Mm.
Sure.
I was particularly interested in a lot of the comments around
the education system, and we've just had the Waitangi Tribunal
inquiring into changes to the curriculum-
Mm
... both the NZC curriculum and Te Marautanga.
And I can see some of the same
issues that are being raised there are coming up for Pasifika
children. So for Maori, 97% of
tamariki Maori are in English medium education.
Mm.
How important it is to have within that curriculum and within that system,
that sense of identity, being able to see
themselves in what they're being taught,
and yeah, the learning that's happening
there.
It also makes me think about from our ECE
level, and I know that we have some Pasifika ECE.
Mm.
We are oversubscribed in kōhanga reo and a need for that to grow.
You're talking about a really young demographic here.
Yeah.
Is there more that you could
expand on in terms of that education,
not only in the language that they're saying they want to be
learning in both languages, but also through into the
compulsory education sector?
In the first instance, we'd probably use this document to
talk about some of the perspectives with
the Ministry of Education.
What I have been excited by recently, and I don't
know if you've had the opportunity to visit the Sisters United
Academy, this is a charter school operating
out of the Alexandra Raceway. Already
it has over 100
women in years nine
and year 10, formative years,
where they are led by
Pasifika teachers,
Pasifika
kaupapa,
and
they've worked on the opening for the
first term as well as the academic achievements.
But the strength of their identity was really
significant, and the safety and
pastoral care
that was offered, that was visible
between the teachers and their students,
made me feel a little bit jealous that I didn't get the opportunity-
Mm
... to participate in an education program like that
myself. Not that my parents would've let me do that because-
... they probably would've seen it as
too much performance
and not enough academic.
But for this cohort,
I could see
really visible, strong sense of-
Mm
... identity and I would
have no doubt that this would translate into academic achievement.
Mm.
So I can't answer the wider question-
Mm
... but to point you to places where you
see
this thriving,
and I would recommend a visit to the Sisters United Academy.
And I suppose that highlights perhaps an
issue with our English medium schooling system,
where that
isn't provided there. And so you have a community
looking at
either a charter school or a special character school to be able to
respond to that
need.
With early childhood education,
it's complex because early childhood education
in language nests, often the focus is on
preservation of the language, and that's amazing.
And sometimes the early childhood education bit becomes
secondary to the language. So it offers a place
for often our matua to find employment
and to speak the language. But then they put all the kids to sleep at the
same time, and they
may have practices that wouldn't be seen by some
as being up with early childhood, good early childhood
education practice.
Conversely, then you get a
center that has really good early childhood education
and absolutely no
ability to harness the language, and I think this
will be a policy dilemma for us as parents' needs
in some areas. The cohort that we're talking about, early
parents, the 15-year-olds, the 16-year-olds,
they are already parents. And this is not to judge them.
Often they come from parents who are-- I
interviewed some and was like, "Oh, so I would be the
same age as your parent." And then it dawned on me that I'm the same age as their
grandparent
and bordering on great-grandparent.
So
these are people that want their children to
align to a strong identity,
and one that accommodates for the very diverse needs
of our community. Mm.
Yeah. Might I add,
I do think there is a desire for culturally appropriate responses in education.
It's just going to be a bit more difficult because
it's not one culture, it's not Maori or Pacific, it is Maori and
Pacific.
Mm-hmm.
So when you're talking about bilingualism, how do you incorporate that in schools?
How do you incorporate which values?
So it's just a discussion that we will bring attention to our
counterparts in education.
Mm. Mm.
I suppose to build on it, it's not just,
what would they say? Two cultures, but it's multiple cultures, multiple languages-
Yeah
... and the resourcing of that sort of thing.
That's right. There's a quote in the report- And dialects.
Yes.
There's a quote in the report that says, "I don't want to
just identify one ethnicity. What about the other seven?"
And so it summarizes it pretty well.
Might I add as well, it
is a strength. I think countries or jurisdictions that
embrace cross-cultural capability actually is a strength.
Research shows that there is a strong correlation to
greater innovation, greater trust- Yeah ... greater productivity. Yes.
So it's more about how we embrace it as a positive thing to incorporate.
Oh, yeah. I can see it amongst our athletes with dual
whakapapa.
Many of them are influencers, and you can just see it.
They are absolutely thriving in all of their whakapapa.
Beautiful to see. Yeah.
Yeah.
I think we've seemed to have our questioning phase is
sort of drawing to a close, but are there any other sort of key points that we
haven't touched on in the oral hearing that you'd like to emphasize?
Thank you for your openness to listening to our Long-term Insights
briefing and the opportunity to bring some of that to life.
Oh, sorry. I do have one more.
Go for it.
We do have one more.
Sorry, everybody. We had this briefing this morning from the Helen
Clark Foundation, and I know you've talked about a particularly
young cohort. Mm. But they were talking- Yeah ...
about a lot of the challenges that we've got with our aging population.
And given my own experience with whanau
who whakapapa, and this is back to four
great-grandparents, so there are some quite elderly ones in
that.
They talked about
the provision of care- Mm ...
and what Maori and Pasifika tend to not go into
retirement villages, rest homes, they can be more in community, in
whanau. Was there anything that you heard around that, or did you just focus on the
younger group? I think
in relation to that report, there are two things that really stand out as really
important. The drop in trust in government,
and how do we work towards that, and the issues around social
cohesion, which do include the intergenerational
transfer of knowledge and care.
We know that Pasifika and Maori tend to look after their
elderly.
If they stop doing that, there's going to be a significant cost to our country. Mm.
And largely because
it's not these people that are
going to be elderly. Mm. Mm.
I have a supplementary, that's all.
Okay. Yes.
So one of the things that we talked about, and was emphasized
in that report, was that we need a lot more small
houses for elderly people, and it was something I thought about at the
time, was isn't that a little bit culturally narrow?
Like, a lot of our communities actually share housing,
and it is very lonely being in all these
little houses. And so when we are planning in
that way for housing for the elderly,
do you think we have to be cognizant of a whole
lot of cultures which have kind of got it right,
and they do actually need
bigger spaces and more connection with each other, and they
need to be intergenerational?
Mm.That's such a big
question.
I know. I'm sorry.
One minute to answer.
It's been an interesting day. Yeah.
Yes.
And I'm reluctant to answer it, because
I will give an answer that doesn't do justice to the
complexity of the issue-
Yeah. Love the answer
... particularly because of the dynamics of the community.
So I suppose then from us, something to pick up from those two
reports is that connection around it, and I agree with Helen.
I was kind of like, "Oh,
smaller, single, but what about intergenerational?" And so then we're actually
talking about larger. And I know that some of our state houses have
been built and provide for that. So, they have their own space, but
they're part of a bigger one.
But yeah, where is that need? How do we plan for that?
What does that spread look like across the country?
So maybe something to look into how this
report feeds into that strategy that needs to be developed.
If you get a chance, I would recommend having a look at the Our
Whare, Our Whanau project, which has been
based and designed around a Pacific village
concept. So the houses are designed with
multiple adaptable spaces, and it is
very much
like a village with a shared-
Where's that?
... family space. In Porirua.
Oh, in Porirua.
In Porirua, yeah.
The school's also like that, isn't it?
The college is-
Yes
... based around a whanau system.
Yes. Might I add just one point, just in relation to universal solutions don't
apply. They're not useful in general.
So to be more targeted around service design or whatever you're offering in terms
of the production of houses,
you do need to take into account
just how people behave, and that's driven by ethnicities and it's driven by a
geography here. So definitely one size fits all would
not be an effective way to design a solution.
One last question from Wharerangi. Yes.
And it's just probably
from what Willow Jean was saying in the select committee briefing that we had
this morning.
Did in any of your conversations with this young
cohort, did they talk about their...
You talked about embracing wisdom, and I'm
quite sure that is so. Did they talk about their old ones?
Did they talk about how they saw their old ones,
and what do they think of their old ones?
Did they talk about them? Did they see what
they envisaged for their old ones, their older
whanau,
older
whanau?
Probably
in some instances, and I can't recall anything
specifically, but I guess it was more the
wairua of knowing that they didn't separate themselves out.
Yeah.
But
they're likely, and what we can do is have a look and come back to you.
Yeah, because I guess what I want to say to that is that
in the discovery of more that you discover when they're sharing, is that
they are a critical
element to their tupuna.
So if they're mokopuna,
the word tupuna, which is that puna, puna, which is a spring.
So they are
so intrinsically connected. They are the source that keeps them
alive. Because my mokopuna, I'm going to stay alive as long as I
possibly can, because they will keep...
I know there's that practical engagement, which is when we're talking about
intergenerational. I didn't even know there was a word.
I know intergenerational is a word now, and it's very popular, but we just called
it whanau.
Mm-hmm.
It was an ordinary way of living.
And I wondered if our young ones recognize, talk, and
see them in that space, because their job will be to keep people
my age alive for as long as possible.
And I'll let- Thank you. Thank you. Sorry, Mr. Chair. No, no, no. Thank you.
Very well said.
Thanks Thank you. Much appreciated. Thanks for you and your team.
So-
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thanks.